06_More_About_Functions/README.md, before:

# More About Functions

## Table of Contents

<hr>

1. [Introduction](#introduction)
2. [Recapping: What We Already Know](#recapping-what-we-already-know)
3. [Functions vs Methods](#functions-vs-methods)
4. [Functions are Objects](#functions-are-objects)

## Introduction

<hr>

We have been using functions in all our mini projects up until now but there are many more things that functions can do in `JavaScript`. In this section we are going to have a look at:

-   Different Ways of Creating Functions
-   Anonymous Functions
-   Callback Functions & Functions in Functions
-   Default Arguments & Rest Operator
-   bind() & More

🏠 [Back To Top](#more-about-functions)

## Recapping: What We Already Know

<hr>

Functions are constructs which allow us to create "Code on Demand", when JavaScript reads our script, it loads all our function declarations, registers them and then it executes the script

If you can recall when we learned about `Block Scope Variables`, that, Variables and Constants that are created in functions **belong** to that function

Functions **CAN** take parameters/arguments and **CAN** return a value, you can write functions that don't need these but some functions work better with these specific requirements.

Functions can be called multiple times with different arguments, it's dynamic which means that you can call your function, add a different argument and that function will still work. So the same function

Functions can be called "directly" or "indirectly"

🏠 [Back To Top](#more-about-functions)

## Parameters vs Arguments

<hr>

Throughout this course, we will use the terms **"parameters"** and **"arguments"**, interchangeably.

**Technically, there is a difference though:**

**Parameters** are these variables which you **specify between parentheses** when defining a function.

```
function sayHi(name) {
    ...
}
```

In this example `name` is a parameter.

**Arguments** then are the **concrete values** you pass to a function when calling that function:

```
sayHi('Trevor');
```

`'Trevor'` is an **argument** of the function therefore - for the `name` parameter to be precise.

Since both concepts obviously are extremely close connected, we will often declare **"let's define which arguments a function receives"**, or something comparable, since defining the arguments of a function in the end means that you set up its parameters (and vice-versa)

🏠 [Back To Top](#more-about-functions)

## Functions vs Methods

<hr>

In short, a written `function` is a function, and a `method` is also a function but is supplied by the browser engine, these are usually called using `dot notation`

Example of a function:

```
function startGame() {
    ....
}
```

Example of a method:

```
starGameBtn.addEventListener('click', startGame);
```

`Objects` , can have properties that we can call, also by using `dot notation`

Example of Object and Properties:

```
const person = {name: 'Trevor'};

console.log(person.name) // 'Trevor'
```

Now, the difference is that with methods, we use and execute them as a function, these are built in functions that JavaScript provides to us

You can have functions in objects and then call them like a regular method:

Example of a function in a object:

```
const person = {
    name: 'Trevor',
    greet: function greet() {
        console.log('Hello There');
    }
};

<!-- Now you can call it like a method as you have declared it in an object -->
person.greet()
```

🏠 [Back To Top](#more-about-functions)

## Functions are Objects

<hr>

Functions themselves are **also methods**

🏠 [Back To Top](#more-about-functions)

Commit message:

Update section 6 readme with notes on why functions are also objects and create an example to show the theory

06_More_About_Functions/README.md, after:

# More About Functions

## Table of Contents

<hr>

1. [Introduction](#introduction)
2. [Recapping: What We Already Know](#recapping-what-we-already-know)
3. [Functions vs Methods](#functions-vs-methods)
4. [Functions are Objects](#functions-are-objects)

## Introduction

<hr>

We have been using functions in all our mini projects up until now but there are many more things that functions can do in `JavaScript`. In this section we are going to have a look at:

-   Different Ways of Creating Functions
-   Anonymous Functions
-   Callback Functions & Functions in Functions
-   Default Arguments & Rest Operator
-   bind() & More

🏠 [Back To Top](#more-about-functions)

## Recapping: What We Already Know

<hr>

Functions are constructs which allow us to create "Code on Demand", when JavaScript reads our script, it loads all our function declarations, registers them and then it executes the script

If you can recall when we learned about `Block Scope Variables`, that, Variables and Constants that are created in functions **belong** to that function

Functions **CAN** take parameters/arguments and **CAN** return a value, you can write functions that don't need these but some functions work better with these specific requirements.

Functions can be called multiple times with different arguments, it's dynamic which means that you can call your function, add a different argument and that function will still work. So the same function

Functions can be called "directly" or "indirectly"

🏠 [Back To Top](#more-about-functions)

## Parameters vs Arguments

<hr>

Throughout this course, we will use the terms **"parameters"** and **"arguments"**, interchangeably.

**Technically, there is a difference though:**

**Parameters** are these variables which you **specify between parentheses** when defining a function.

```
function sayHi(name) {
    ...
}
```

In this example `name` is a parameter.

**Arguments** then are the **concrete values** you pass to a function when calling that function:

```
sayHi('Trevor');
```

`'Trevor'` is an **argument** of the function therefore - for the `name` parameter to be precise.

Since both concepts obviously are extremely close connected, we will often declare **"let's define which arguments a function receives"**, or something comparable, since defining the arguments of a function in the end means that you set up its parameters (and vice-versa)

🏠 [Back To Top](#more-about-functions)

## Functions vs Methods

<hr>

In short, a written `function` is a function, and a `method` is also a function but is supplied by the browser engine, these are usually called using `dot notation`

Example of a function:

```
function startGame() {
    ....
}
```

Example of a method:

```
starGameBtn.addEventListener('click', startGame);
```

`Objects` , can have properties that we can call, also by using `dot notation`

Example of Object and Properties:

```
const person = {name: 'Trevor'};

console.log(person.name) // 'Trevor'
```

Now, the difference is that with methods, we use and execute them as a function, these are built in functions that JavaScript provides to us

You can have functions in objects and then call them like a regular method:

Example of a function in a object:

```
const person = {
    name: 'Trevor',
    greet: function greet() {
        console.log('Hello There');
    }
};

<!-- Now you can call it like a method as you have declared it in an object -->
person.greet()
```

🏠 [Back To Top](#more-about-functions)

## Functions are Objects

<hr>

Functions themselves are **also objects**, we can explore this quite easily:

```
console.dir(startGame);
```

Now, what this does is when you access the console using your developer tools, you get to see the breakdown of this:

![Function as an Object in the console](https://github.com/trevthedev777/JavaScript-As-I-Learnt-It/blob/main/Readme_imgs/Section_6_consoledir.jpg?raw=true)

🏠 [Back To Top](#more-about-functions)
